 
 

 

 

1

560th FPRAC 

Room 5526 

Office of Personnel Management 

Washington, D.C. 

Thursday, January 20, 2011 

SHELDON FRIEDMAN, Chairperson, Presiding 

FEDERAL PREVAILING RATE ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ATTENDANCE: 
 
Members/Alternates: 
  Management Members 
  MARK ALLEN, Office of Personnel Management 
  JOHN EHRBAR, Department of Defense 
  CARLOS SAAVEDRA, Department of Navy 
  BARBARA WALKER, Department of Army 
  THURSTAN HUNTER, Department of Veterans Affairs 
 
  Labor Members 
  DENNIS PHELPS, Metals Trade Department 
  J. DAVID COX, AFGE 
  JACQUELINE SIMON, AFGE 
  GINA LIGHTFOOT-WALKER, NAGE 
  STEVE FISHER, ACT 
 
Staff Specialists and Visitors: 
  MADELINE GONZALEZ, Office of Personnel Management 
  CHARLES D. GRIMES III, Office of Personnel Management 
  STEVE RUMBLE, Department of Defense 
  H.L. ROVAN, Department of Defense 
  KARL FENDT, Department of Defense 
  DAWNA POWELL, Department of Defense 
  MELISSA ARROYO, Department of Navy 
  WILLIAM FENAUGHTY, NFFE 
  MARY AUGSBURGER, Department of Air Force 
  
Recording Secretary:  TERRI AVONDET 
 
 [Transcript prepared from digital audio provided by FPRAC.] 

 

 
 

 

 

2

C O N T E N T S 

 
                                                        Page 
 
I.    Opening/Announcements 
      • Introductions......................................3 
      Announcements 
        - Issue raised by Representative Boozman (special 
          pay practice for lock and dam employees).........4 
        - Fiscal Year 2011 Prevailing Rate Pay 
          Adjustments, 560-OPM-1...........................4 
 
II.   Review of the Minutes of the 559th Meeting...........5 
 
III.  Old Business 
      Review of Lee County, Virginia, 557-MGT-2..........5 
      Discussion of Survey Issues/Concerns...............6 
 
IV.   New Business 
      Review of the Pay Practice for FWS Employees at 
        Reservoir Projects................................10 
      Timeliness of FPRAC Recommendations...............17 
 
 

--

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

3

P R O C E E D I N G S 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  Thank you.  Welcome everybody 

to this 560th meeting of FPRAC, and Happy New Year to all. 

 

I am Sheldon Friedman, Chairman of FPRAC, and as 

usual, why don't we go around and introduce ourselves. 

 

 

 

 

MR. ALLEN:  Mark Allen with OPM. 

MR. EHRBAR:  John Ehrbar, Department of Defense. 

MS. WALKER:  Barbara Walker with Army. 

MR. HUNTER:  Thurstan Hunter, Department of 

Veterans Affairs. 

 

MR. PHELPS:  Dennis Phelps with Metal Trades 

Department. 

 

 

 

NAGE. 

 

 

MR. COX:  J. David Cox, AFGE. 

MS. SIMON:  Jackie Simon, AFGE. 

MS. LIGHTFOOT-WALKER:  Gina Lightfoot-Walker, 

MR. FISHER:  Steve Fisher, ACT. 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  And if people sitting along 

the sides of the room would introduce themselves, as well. 

MR. RUMBLE:  Steve Rumble, DoD. 

MS. POWELL:  Dawna Powell, DoD. 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4

MR. FENDT:  Karl Fendt, DoD. 

MR. ROVAN:  Hank Rovan, Department of Defense. 

MS. AVONDET:  Terri Avondet, OPM. 

MS. GONZALEZ:  Madeline Gonzalez, OPM. 

MR. WALLACE:  Chris Wallace, OPM. 

MR. FENAUGHTY:  Bill Fenaughty, NFFE. 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  Welcome again, everyone.  Our 

recorder worked very well last time, so we have new 

equipment.  So we think we may have licked our transcription 

problem; that is to say, the new equipment worked.  So we 

don't think we need a court transcriber anymore, we hope.  

We will cross our fingers. 

 

Let me just go through a couple of issues by way 

of announcements.  Is there anything new on the longstanding 

issue raised by now Senator Boozman? 

 

MR. ALLEN:  We don't have anything to introduce 

today.  We are making progress on that study of the locks 

and dams schedules. 

 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  Okay.  And everybody has in 

their packets a memo from OPM Director Berry regarding the 

Fiscal Year 2011 Prevailing Rate Pay Adjustments, Document 

 

 
 

 

 

5

560-OPM-1.  Any questions about that? 

 

 

[No response.] 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  Hearing none, let's move on to 

review of the minutes of our previous meeting. 

 

Does everyone have the minutes and has everyone 

had a chance to review them?  Are there any further 

corrections or changes beyond those that people have already 

submitted? 

 

Going once -- hearing none, is there a motion to 

approve the minutes of the last meeting? 

 

 

 

 

MR. PHELPS:  So moved. 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  Is there a second? 

MR. ALLEN:  And second. 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  So, if there is no objection, 

we have adopted the minutes from the last meeting. 

 

That brings up the first item of Old Business, 

Review of Lee County, Virginia. 

 

 

Is there any discussion? 

MR. ALLEN:  It's my understanding, Mr. Chairman, 

that the issue of Lee County wasn't one that we were able to 

resolve by consensus at the last meeting.  A member was 

 

 
 

 

 

6

going to ask for additional information, I believe. 

 

 

MS. SIMON:  We don't have it yet. 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  Don't have it yet?  You need 

more time to do that?  So we will kick the can down the road 

on this one?  Okay? 

 

 

 

MR. ALLEN:  Yes, that's fine. 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  That's what we will do. 

And that brings up discussion of survey issues and 

concerns that bubbled up late last year.  As I indicated at 

the last meeting, I would and did prepare a memo of ideas 

that could be the basis for work group discussion. 

 

It is only my ideas, it is not engraved in 

anything except maybe printer’s ink, and so I would welcome 

comments. We don't have a particularly crowded agenda today, 

so if people wanted to start discussing this now, we could 

do that.  Alternatively, please feel free to send in any 

comments or suggestions you have, things that ought to be 

added to the list, things that you feel strongly ought to be 

subtracted from the list or rephrased. 

 

Obviously, it's a very long list, and one thing 

that would be helpful is to have suggestions about how to 

 

 
 

 

 

7

proceed through it in an orderly way, which topics to take 

up first, what the sequence should be in the work group.  If 

people want to start discussing this now or just respond off 

line, do it, whatever is your pleasure, but please respond 

to me. 

 

MR. ALLEN:  I would like to thank the Chairman for 

putting down so many thoughts in one place.  I looked 

through the document and what I have seen are things that 

have been raised in a variety of different forms by 

employees under the Federal Wage System, and they are not 

questions that this committee has really addressed for a 

long time. 

 

I think a good number of them are more reflective 

of lack of information or lack of adequate information among 

employees, and others are ones where this committee needs to 

consider improvements to the wage system and possibly 

recommend any changes to the Director of OPM that might make 

the system function better. 

 

 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  Any other discussion? 

MS. SIMON:  I would just agree with Mark.  I am 

not sure, you know, how much, you know, maybe some of these 

 

 
 

 

 

8

questions will be easily answered, but a lot of them will 

require doing some research and maybe even field research, 

and I think it is a really comprehensive list and it's a 

great list, and actually, I reserve the right to come back 

and ask to include some additional issues, but right now, my 

first perusal, it seems a very comprehensive list and all 

things that I would like us to work on in our work group.  

It does address at least all of the kind of inquiries we 

have had from our members in our local that involve problems 

with the data collections I have had. 

 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  I should say it is not meant 

to foreclose anything.  In fact, as we get into it, we may 

well uncover additional topics. 

 

Welcome, Carlos.  Why don't you state for the 

reporter that you are here. 

 

MR. SAAVEDRA:  Carlos Saavedra, Department of the 

Navy.  Thank you. 

 

MR. ALLEN:  I would note for the record that the 

Committee membership has changed to conform to the practice 

of rotating the military department representation among 

Army, Navy, and Air Force.  Air Force was replaced by Navy 

 

 
 

 

in 2011. 

 

9

 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  Congratulations.  Well, I 

guess, then, the next step would be for us to set a meeting 

date for the work group, which we either without our 

calendars try to do here, or could ask Madeline to please 

contact everybody about availability. 

 

What is your pleasure, just ask Madeline to try to 

schedule an initial meeting for us? 

 

 

will do. 

 

 

MR. PHELPS:  That sounds good to me. 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  Okay.  So, that is what we 

Well -- yes, go ahead. 

MS. SIMON:  I have some questions.  This is kind 

of on a separate issue, but I actually had not seen that 

memorandum of December 27 on the implementation of the 

freeze. 

 

 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  We can go back to that. 

MS. SIMON:  Well, it's okay, I mean I have looked 

at it, you know, but I just want to ask a question.  

Everything is going to go forward as if there weren't a 

freeze.  It's just that nobody is going to get a pay raise. 

 

 
 

 

 

10

 Is that correct? 

 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  Do you want to respond to 

that, Mark? 

 

MR. ALLEN:  What do you mean by "Everything is 

going to go forward"? 

 

MS. SIMON:  All the machinery of the Federal Wage 

System will continue to operate as if there were not a pay 

freeze even though nobody will get a pay raise. 

 

MR. ALLEN:  All the wage surveys?  Yeah, that is 

going to be ongoing. 

 

MS. SIMON:  Wage surveys, publication of 

schedules, and all that kind of stuff.  It is just that 

nothing will be implemented, and everything will continue to 

occur. 

 

 

 

MR. ALLEN:  That's right. 

MS. SIMON:  Okay. 

MR. ALLEN:  Unless somebody orders us to stop.  I 

haven't heard anybody say anything about that. 

 

 

MS. SIMON:  Okay. 

MR. ALLEN:  Yeah, it's business as usual in the 

actual wage survey process unless DoD has a different 

 

 
 

 

opinion. 

 

11

 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  Anything further on the 

Director's Memorandum? 

 

 

[No response.] 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  Okay.  I had asked for two new 

items under New Business, essentially by way of follow-up to 

a concern that was raised by former Representative Childers 

in Northern Mississippi. 

 

One is -- and I am just going to think out loud 

here, I don't really know what to do about this -- so, on 

the one hand, so here we have a string of four lakes in very 

close geographic proximity, to one another, that straddles 

two FWS wage areas. I don't think there is any dispute that 

folks are doing pretty much the same work, and they are all 

working for the same administrative unit of the same agency. 

 

The current geographic criteria do not appear to 

warrant having them all in the same wage area, and yet to me 

somehow it seems kind of strange that folks working so close 

together for the same administrative unit of the same 

agency, doing essentially the same work, are getting paid 

differently depending on which lake they are at. 

 

 
 

 

 

 

12

I don't know if anyone else is troubled by that.  

I could be the only one, in which case we can scratch this 

issue right off our list.  Apparently, a long time ago, 

FPRAC did review the pay practice for the reservoir 

employees of the Army Corps of Engineers. The 1970s was the 

last review. 

 

It seems to me it might be time to look again to 

see if perhaps there is a different approach that is needed 

for these folks.  If people agree with that, then I would 

propose we put it on our agenda; let's take a look at it. 

 

MS. SIMON:  It is obvious that you are not the 

only person that cares about this, because former 

Representative Childers came forward to bring it to our 

attention as a problem, so I think we -- I would like to say 

that I am in favor of pursuing a solution. 

 

MR. PHELPS:  Metal Trades Department would like to 

do so, as well. 

 

 

MR. FISHER:  ACT also. 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  Any other discussion of this 

question at this time? 

MR. ALLEN:  The issue with the Northern 

 

 

 
 

 

 

13

Mississippi wage area, which used to be called the Columbus-

Aberdeen wage area, is really not a new issue.  It's one 

that has drawn OPM's attention for at least as long as I 

have been at OPM, and prior to that we received annual 

letters from senators and representatives representing the 

employees of the lakes, and they have basically said the 

same thing that Representative Childers said, which is 

questioning why employees at the lakes are paid from 

different wage schedules. 

 

What I would recommend is that we try and wrap 

that discussion up within the working group discussion, 

because it is more or less a question of the underlying 

philosophy of the prevailing rate system. 

 

There are always going to be gray areas that are 

difficult to explain to employees, and I think the case 

would be the four lakes is one of those gray areas, but I 

think it is something that is best addressed in a working 

group setting rather than trying to attempt to do a re-

analysis of what was a consensus recommendation from this 

committee a few months ago. 

Basically, what I am saying is we need to look at 

 

 

 
 

 

 

14

the underlying rule rather than just trying to focus on four 

lakes. 

 

MS. SIMON:  What was the consensus recommendation 

of three months ago having to do with this? 

 

MR. ALLEN:  It was to move one county containing 

one lake -- 

MS. SIMON:  Oh, right, okay. 

MR. ALLEN:  -- from the Northern Mississippi wage 

 

 

area. 

 

MS. SIMON:  But it didn't deal with two other 

counties. 

 

 

MR. ALLEN:  That's right. 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  I hear what you are saying and 

it makes good sense to me.  I just wouldn't want the 

specific issue to get lost.  We have got a lot of ground to 

cover in the work group.  I do think it has been a long time 

since this specific a practice for these reservoir 

employees, it has been -- 

 

MR. ALLEN:  The reason I suggest that is that 

there are a couple of things that have been raised in the 

past at the committee, in the recent past, the first being 

 

 
 

 

 

15

the number of employees within a local wage area, whether it 

makes sense to continue having very small wage areas. 

 

Another is where do you actually best determine 

local market rates.  In the case of the Northern Mississippi 

wage area, one of the lakes is actually in a survey county, 

and the reason that the management members did not recommend 

that that county and the one adjacent to it be part of the 

Memphis wage area was because it makes the most sense under 

OPM's regulatory criteria to pay employees under a 

prevailing rate system according to where the main private 

sector competitors are, and because we do a survey in a 

county that is containing one of the lakes, it made the most 

sense to not move those two counties to another wage area, 

but just to leave them where they are at. 

 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  Yeah, and maybe this will come 

up in the work group, but to me, that is the heart of the 

issue.  We have geographic criteria and there is scope for 

judgment in how you apply them, but let's say for argument's 

sake, you apply the geographic criteria and they say county 

X belongs where it is, and yet, you have this administrative 

relationship between the places of employment of the workers 

 

 
 

 

 

16

who are very close by each other, and some of them are in 

the next county and getting quite a different wage scale. 

 

So, the issue in my mind is what I will call the 

"geographic rigidity" of the criteria.  Is that a problem 

for us?  Do we need some flexibility in cases like this to 

have a different way of figuring out what is appropriate for 

these folks?  If we want to cover it in the work group, that 

is fine with me. 

 

 

MR. ALLEN:  I think it's a good subject for the 

working group to take a look at mainly because I think it's 

important not to focus on just one instance, but to take a 

broader look. 

 

I think that really what this committee should be 

responsible for doing is just taking a look at the entire 

pay system and seeing if things really do make sense rather 

than trying to just narrowly focus on individual questions. 

 

MS. SIMON:  Well, it seems like this working group 

that we are about to establish is focused on survey issues, 

and this is not a survey issue per se, so, you know, maybe 

what we should do is commit to working through this first 

and then getting to the survey issues.  Otherwise, it is 

 

 
 

 

 

17

such a different issue.  It could either get lost or if 

it's, you know, saved for last, then, it's really 

problematic. 

 

Since everybody participates in all the working 

group meetings, you know, it is not like some of the people 

show up only for some working group meetings. 

 

MR. SAAVEDRA:  I do believe it's a survey issue 

because otherwise what we end up doing is, in the work 

group, pick up survey issues, and continue to take case-by-

case cases that, for whatever reason, someone doesn't feel 

good about the way the survey criteria pans out for that 

location. 

 

-- 

 

So, it is a survey issue, and unless we settle it 

MS. SIMON:  Okay.  We will say that it's a survey 

issue and then maybe take it up first. 

 

MR. SAAVEDRA:  And once we settle it's a survey 

issue, then, let the chips fall where they may. 

 

MS. SIMON:  Okay, call it a survey issue and take 

it up first. 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  Okay.  It seems like we have a 

 

 

 
 

 

 

18

consensus on that way of handling this issue.   

 

So, this brings up another item, an issue of 

timeliness of our recommendations.  Let me address this in 

the following way, and I want to make sure this is not 

interpreted by anybody as criticism of anyone or their work 

or staff work here at OPM, and I am just really raising a 

question for the members of the committee. 

 

Is anyone besides me troubled by the timeliness 

with which we are able to address some of the issues that 

come before us?  If it's only me, then, we can scratch it 

right off the list, but if others are also troubled by that, 

then, it may be worth figuring out what, if anything, can be 

done about that issue. 

 

 

thing. 

 

 

MS. SIMON:  We used to have -- 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  Let me just say one more 

MS. SIMON:  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  So, a lot of delay is clearly 

related to lack of consensus.  Some delays I understand from 

reading past history of the committee from way before I got 

here.  There was just not consensus, and for whatever 

 

 
 

 

 

19

reason, people didn't want to bring it to a vote, so issues 

never got resolved for that reason, and I understand that. 

But in other cases, there may be other reasons why we don't 

operate in a timely way sometimes. 

 

So, with that, I welcome any thoughts people have 

about either whether you share my concern, or whether you 

think it is not an issue we should be worried about. 

 

MS. SIMON:  I think you just said it.  I think 

that there are controversial issues that stay on here for a 

long time, because there is no consensus and they keep being 

reintroduced or, you know, we just don't resolve them, and, 

you know, we have got other issues pending.  I mean I don't 

know if the Director has acted on the flat rate plan for the 

auto mechanics, has he? 

 

 

MR. ALLEN:  No. 

MS. SIMON:  Okay.  So, he has got at least two 

things sitting on his desk that he hasn't done anything 

about, you know, so it is sort of an extension of our 

delays, anything that is controversial. 

 

MR. ALLEN:  I will admit that the whole process 

for making changes in the Federal Wage System is pretty 

 

 
 

 

 

20

laborious.  Part of that has to do with the fact that OPM 

has to make changes in almost all of our policies affecting 

the Federal Wage System through the regulatory process. 

 

We have been able to streamline some of those so 

that we don't have to go through OMB for certain wage area 

redefinition changes, but I think, at least from my 

perspective, that the committee is able to act quickly when 

acting quickly is appropriate, but then there are other 

times when it takes a while for the members to do enough 

fact finding to get comfortable with an issue, and I will 

bring up the issue of the nonappropriated fund automotive 

mechanics as an example of that. 

 

That proposal, as it was eventually passed by the 

committee, was not the same proposal that came before the 

committee a couple of years before.  There was some movement 

which made the proposal a little bit more beneficial for 

existing employees, and those are the kinds of things that I 

think we should be striving for, which is that you shouldn't 

come to the committee with hard opinion about one thing or 

another when not all of us have all the facts at hand, and I 

am certainly open to listening to other opinions, but 

 

 
 

 

 

21

sometimes it just takes a while for those opinions to get 

out and be understood about what everybody is trying to say. 

 

MS. SIMON:  I also think I am not as -- I haven't 

been around as long on this issue as Mark -- but things do 

seem to be moving faster these days than they were before.  

So, it may seem slow, but I think it's getting better. 

 

 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  That's progress. 

MS. SIMON:  But I may be wrong, but it seems like 

we have cleaned up our agenda and our old business that used 

to be really, really long. 

 

MR. ALLEN:  I will note that our Chairman is doing 

a good job of keeping us moving. 

 

 

bucks. 

 

 

 

MS. SIMON:  Yeah. 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  That's why I get paid the big 

[Laughter.] 

MS. SIMON:  The frozen big bucks. 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  Yeah, whatever.   Well, I 

would appreciate it if people would let me know if there is 

any more on this issue of timeliness.  Let me know off line 

or we can bring it up at a meeting, but I just wanted to 

 

 
 

 

 

22

plant that seed and take people's temperature on that issue. 

 

Well, I guess that is all that we have for today 

unless there is some other item of business that people need 

to bring up. 

 

 

Is there anything else? 

MS. SIMON:  This might not be the right forum, but 

some of the right people are in the room, I just wanted to 

ask, the DoD Wage Committee meetings have to occur once a 

month, is that it?  Mark, do you know? 

 

 

MR. PHELPS:  Next year, every two weeks. 

MS. SIMON:  Every two weeks, the new schedules 

have to be approved, and they can't be approved unless there 

is a meeting and everybody is present, and all that kind of 

stuff. 

 

Can FPRAC change the rules for the approval of 

those schedules to allow participation by phone?  Would that 

be within the purview of FPRAC? 

 

 

MR. ALLEN:  No, it's really -- 

MS. SIMON:  Is that statutory that people have to 

be in the room? 

MR. ALLEN:  It is really an issue that should be 

 

 

 
 

 

 

23

addressed to the DoD Wage Committee.  The DoD Wage Committee 

operates separate from FPRAC. 

 

 

MS. SIMON:  Completely separately, okay. 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  I'm just curious.  Have they 

been unwilling to allow phone participation? 

 

MS. SIMON:  Well, I think that they say we are not 

permitted.  You know, it's not like a -- nobody is trying to 

be uncooperative, but apparently, the discretion to allow 

phone participation, I mean we adopted rules that allowed 

phone participation for FPRAC, but the DoD Wage Committee is 

precluded from adopting such a rule? 

 

 

 

MR. EHRBAR:  Let's take a look at it. 

MS. SIMON:  Okay. 

MR. EHRBAR:  It's the first time it was brought 

up, to my attention anyhow.  We will take a look at it. 

 

 

 

 

MS. SIMON:  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  Is there anything further? 

[No response.] 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  If not, a motion to adjourn 

would be welcome. 

MR. PHELPS:  So moved. 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

24

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  Second? 

MR. ALLEN:  Seconded. 

CHAIRMAN FRIEDMAN:  See everybody next month, and 

we will be in touch about scheduling the work group. 

Thank you. 

--

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

